sublime/README.md, before:

# Asm6502 - Sublime Text Package[Sublime Text 3](http://www.sublimetext.com/3) is a great text editor that supports custom languages and build scripts, Asm6502.sublime-package is a single file collection of config files that enable Asm6502 language syntax, Asm6502 Build and an Asm6502 color theme that's got some c64 colors in it as well.Copy Asm6502.sublime-package from this folder to:Windows: ```%USERPROFILE%\AppData\Roaming\Sublime Text 3\Installed Packages\```OSX:```~/Library/Application Support/Sublime Text 3/Installed Packages/```Compile a 64 or 32 bit release build of Asm6502 and put it into c:\c64\asm6502\asm6502.exeDownload the Vice C64 Emulator into c:\vice or c:\c64\viceWithin Sublime Text set the Build System to Asm6502 with a 6502 .s or .asm source file loaded and press Ctrl+B to build, or Ctrl+6 to build and launch Vice with the built prg file.With sincere apologies to the author of the Sublime Text package for Kick Assembler without which I would have spent countless hours to figure this out, check out the kick assembler Sublime package here:http://goatpower.org/projects-releases/sublime-package-kick-assembler-c64/Feel free to modify this package as desired. To open up the individual files add a '.zip' extension to Asm6502.sublime-package and unzip it and paste the files to```%USERPROFILE%\AppData\Roaming\Sublime Text 3\Packages\Asm6502```

Commit message:

Adding ENUM and assembler directives from LISA and MERLIN assemblers.

sublime/README.md, after:

# Asm6502 - Sublime Text Package[Sublime Text 3](http://www.sublimetext.com/3) is a great text editor that supports custom languages and build scripts, Asm6502.sublime-package is a single file collection of config files that enable Asm6502 language syntax, Asm6502 Build and an Asm6502 color theme that's got some c64 colors in it as well.Updates* 2015-10-06 Fixed some naming, added a bunch more directives as recognized keywords including a bunch for MERLIN / LISA assemblers.Copy Asm6502.sublime-package from this folder to:Windows: ```%USERPROFILE%\AppData\Roaming\Sublime Text 3\Installed Packages\```OSX:```~/Library/Application Support/Sublime Text 3/Installed Packages/```Compile a 64 or 32 bit release build of Asm6502 and put it into c:\c64\asm6502\asm6502.exeDownload the Vice C64 Emulator into c:\vice or c:\c64\viceWithin Sublime Text set the Build System to Asm6502 with a 6502 .s or .asm source file loaded and press Ctrl+B to build, or Ctrl+6 to build and launch Vice with the built prg file.With sincere apologies to the author of the Sublime Text package for Kick Assembler without which I would have spent countless hours to figure this out, check out the kick assembler Sublime package here:http://goatpower.org/projects-releases/sublime-package-kick-assembler-c64/Feel free to modify this package as desired. To open up the individual files add a '.zip' extension to Asm6502.sublime-package and unzip it and paste the files to```%USERPROFILE%\AppData\Roaming\Sublime Text 3\Packages\Asm6502```
